all right well this has been an
incredible past day and a half of web 3
summit and we are so excited to have you
here today there's a number of talents
of developers and researchers and
advocates building a decentralized web
focused in privacy and censorship
resistance our vision of this new web is
transparency for the Commons and privacy
for the individual and no one has done
more to validate this need than our next
speaker Edward Snowden
[Applause]
thank you so much for joining us thanks
for joining us we have this incredible
room of developers and technologists and
people who are passionate to hear what
you have to say so I will just let you
take it away okay
cold-open first of all thank you all for
bringing me to speak with you you know
it's tough for me to get over to Berlin
these days but I'm still hoping in the
future you know I might be able to come
in person when I give these talks since
2013 you know I've been asked many
different things about what's happening
with journalism about what's happening
with government what's happening with
the Internet what's happening with
technology and the funny thing is I
think they're actually all centralized
around similar factors and most of you
are familiar with them right and anybody
who is into technology and is not simply
a developer right but is also a user
anyone who's interested in privacy
anybody who's working with you know
online financial technology who's
thinking about you know crypto
currencies or it could just be Bitcoin
or competitors to it is is seeing that
increasingly there's all of these
threads connecting to one another and
it's not a single thing but rather we
have an entire ecosystem that is
decaying right because it's actively
under threat you know in the the earlier
half of this century or this last
century scientists and engineers were
committing their lives to the pursuit of
a new science nuclear physics and you
know it was an incredibly passionate
work publications went all over the
world in every language um and it just
energized an entire generation with the
possibilities of free nearly unlimited
clean energy advances in medical
technology advances in transportation it
was obvious how these new advances could
be applied for the betterment of every
but it was also not long until the work
of that cohort began to be applied to
private needs and this is interesting
because most famously were talking about
nuclear weapons and people don't think
about that as private needs people think
about what the government does is as the
public good well what's good for the
state is very different than what's good
for the people in many cases and I think
what we are seeing today is the work of
our greatest minds of the last 50 years
now increasingly their work being
indentured to the service of the private
good now this isn't just the state this
is of course the corporate state that we
see the Facebook's the googles that are
launching on our common backbone and
they're trying to insert themselves into
every human transaction and these aren't
merely trade transactions these are
communications transactions and this is
how we see the same thing that happened
in the last century beginning to repeat
again a science that was developed in
pursuit of the ideal of the common good
being captured and distorted for the
private benefit of certain groups right
this can be a a private elite corporate
segment or of course the the national
elite now this is the reason that I say
what we're living through today is the
atomic moment of computer science this
is where we really have to look at what
our work isn't done and I don't mean
your work personally because a lot of
you guys in the room you know free
software guys you tend to be on the the
better side of a lot of these conflicts
but we all have to realize that
everything that we do isn't enough you
know when I was sitting in 2013 and I
saw what my government was doing behind
closed doors without consent of the
governed in the United States without
the knowledge or consent of anyone in
the world
flagrant violations both of us law
constitutional
rights and more importantly human rights
around the world I really wanted to tell
somebody about it because I thought it
was wrong it took me a very very long
time to decide to come forward and tell
people about it yeah even though I was
increasingly certain that this was
something that that was in many cases
contrary to what the government can even
be permitted to do if they pass a law
but I knew that if I did there were
gonna be consequences for me it was
gonna be difficult for me personally I
didn't know quite how difficult but I
did have an idea and it is this kind of
natural pressure the incentives and
disincentives to a given move that a
person can take in our lives and our
communities and our societies that I
think all of us who work with systems
understand very well because this is how
systems work this is how systems are
regulated and as it stands today all of
the pre-existing laws and all of the
loopholes that governments use to
violate the spirit of the law even if
not the letter of the law or more
importantly indirectly just to violate
our rights or the dignity of a given
person these are all achieved by
exploiting their deep understanding of
where the incentives are in the
disincentives are primarily they can
break the law without punishment because
they're the ones who applied the wall so
what does it mean when the greatest
safeguard of human rights that we've
ever had in history the law begins to
fail I know some people who have thought
about this a lot more deeply than
talking about it at the conference but I
think this is where we see a lot of
excitement coming from technology
recently and particularly people who are
working on these new decentralized sort
of ledger based type applications is
this idea that maybe when the law fails
us our technology can catch us the
problem of course is that technology has
been catching us general members of the
public people who know don't know a
fraction
some of the people in the room know and
harming them quite significantly so what
do we do and what are the actual
problems I I think it's this
identification of the problem that
really helps us now I think we're moving
quite far along here but the thing that
keeps me up at night the thing that I've
been thinking about for years the reason
that I wrote a book about this that
actually comes out of like a month is
that when I was a child and and I was in
high school even before high school
because of I think you guys know the
personality type you probably struggled
the same way now you have someone an
authority who's telling you what to do
they don't explain why you don't
understand the system and yet the system
is applied to you you have no power
within the context of the system you are
not allowed to change the rules you're
not even allowed to petition to change
the rules that's simply the way things
are and someone says do this and you ask
why and they said because I said so this
is the way a lot of power relationships
work today whether it's in the United
States where our electoral system is
gerrymandered so much that we can't
change power even if we campaign to the
operations of Internet giant's where you
see everybody complaining you see
everybody trying to boycott you see
everybody pressuring them and saying bad
things about them but they only change
their policies at the very smallest
edges if at all and the reason I think
they feel so comfortable all of these
these types of authorities throughout
history is they have a mastery of our
fear of what happens if we break the
rules what happens if we try to change
the way the system works and when I was
young the way this this worked was if
you cut up in class if you you know got
out of line
they'd say and of course a very
concerned manner for for you because
it's you that are always worried about
not not them not their convenience but
you you need to think about your future
you need to think about what its gonna
look like if everybody else is following
rules and you're the only one breaking
them if you get out of line if you get a
bad grade if you get a detention if you
do whatever if you talk back if you
question everything all the time this
will go down on your permanent record
and then it will follow you to high
school and then it will follow you to
college and then it will follow you
workplace and then it'll follow you
through the rest of your interactions
with power and you know as a kid when
you don't know anything about anything
that's actually terrifying and over time
bit by bit as you do more and more the
threat begins to lose its power because
you realize that there actually isn't
the permanent record nobody cares what
you did in elementary school nobody
cares what you did in middle school
nobody cared about high school or
college or honestly nobody really cares
about what you do in your workplace
besides your employer and then your next
employer but at best the records have
never been permanent they've never been
perfect until now and this is the
problem of the world we live in the
younger you are in this room relative to
the person next to you the more of your
life is known recorded by people you
have no influence over and these records
at least under the laws in the United
States which have been unfortunately
exported around the world into a kind of
status quo mmm
says that you don't own records about
your private life these companies that
created them they're their records not
you even if they're entirely and
exclusively about you and this is I
think the central problem that we're
struggling with is all of these
companies all of these governments
everybody who has any sort of
aspirations of power is recognizing that
understanding as much as possible about
as many as possible is the lever of
influence we see target news we see this
being used to write news we see this
being used to change politics we use see
this being used to try to influence
purchasing decisions right all of these
things are about shaping human behavior
and all of these things which I would
argue are fundamentally anti-democratic
forces and actually I would argue these
are antisocial forces are really about
shaping the behavior of other people to
your benefit right and if this can be
done secretly if this can be didn't done
privately all the better and when I look
at this and I think about my own history
and I think about what's happening on
the Internet I think one of the biggest
vulnerabilities in our system right the
vulnerability that's being exploited by
all of these forces is identity in the
modern world we are not permitted a
sense of ownership without identity to
be able to make a trade in many cases
and God if you live in some place like
Sweden where they're trying to get rid
of cash right you've got to use a card
the card is connected to your bank
account that goes on if you're trying to
buy something like property right how
are they even gonna register that they
need you to show your ID they need you
to get it stamped you go to the people
at the desk the people the desk and
bless you to be able to participate in
this transaction if you want to be about
able to buy a bottle of water at the gas
station this has been and should be a
cash transaction it should be traceless
but now increasingly there's cards
involved now increasingly there's
cameras involved now increasingly
there's Bluetooth beacons in the store
that look at your phone and they see oh
it's got its Bluetooth active because it
was just connected to its car so we know
it's this device we've seen this device
this mall
they've got license plate readers all of
these things form big constellation of
richness especially when compounded with
the fact that your cell phone is
constantly a hundred percent of the time
that it's turned on screaming out into
the sky Here I am Here I am
register me to the nearest tower and
then they're there tracking where this
goes and all of this all of these things
mean we're never anonymous we're never
just a person we're always this specific
entity and we are this specific entity
we can be nudged we can be shifted we
can be shaped by all of these people
because we have universally unique
identifiers now programmers developers
they love universally or globally unique
identifiers right they want their
metrics they want their analytics they
want to see what's happening on you know
this app push they want to see what's
happening on this kind of device and so
they collect everyone from everything
for everything from everyone everywhere
right that's no different than what the
NSA does now that's no different one
what Facebook does that's no different
than what Google does and they do it
because it grants them increased power
right they can be better developers and
I understand that I'm sympathetic to
that but I think we need to sit back and
really take a look at the fact that when
we are gating access to the
infrastructure that's necessary for life
through this process of proving who you
are rather than proving a right to use
right that you paid for this that you
should be able to access to this that
you have a blinded token of some type it
could belong to anyone but it's the
digital equivalent of cash that's going
look you know it doesn't matter who I am
I'm allowed to be here right I'm
basically supporting the infrastructure
I've done my part that's all it should
be because otherwise we're being forced
to give up ownership of our identities
we're giving up ownership of our
histories right we're allowing others to
control the story of our private lives
they get to shape it they get to tell it
they get to say this is the narrative of
this person this phone this car this
whatever this browser right and when we
have this pervasive collection of our
sorry not pervasive collection but this
pervasive creation of records what we
fundamentally have is the disempowerment
of the individual and we have the
empowerment of the institution and you
know a lot of people are fans of
institutions and institutions have done
a lot of good throughout history but
they've also done a lot of bad and the
question is what happens when you have
institutions that are so strong that
there is no alternative what happens
when you have institutions around the
world in every country and they don't
don't even answer to your country right
it's like a Mark Zuckerberg who won't go
and talk to UK Parliament because he
doesn't care about UK Parliament he'll
just send some Lackey right and the
people of these countries they ask why
why do you do this how do we change this
we don't like this and entities can't
simply respond well that's the way it is
because I said so I'm the one in charge
we need to be able to create data right
move data process data and transact on
this data without creating a history
that it happened and what I mean by a
history that happened is I mean the
history of you connecting the person to
the thing the transaction does not need
to belong to you the transaction belongs
to itself you know you can balance the
books without knowing everything's
connected everyone and I know a lot of
you guys believe in this but I'm afraid
that we see a lot of people who don't
believe in it enough one of the biggest
criticisms that I have of the Bitcoin
blockchain today is the fact that it's
not at all private they're not even
pretending to try to be private there
are arguments and I know there are
proposals that they're gonna try to
bring things on chain they're gonna try
to integrate you know these enhancement
proposals or improvement proposals but
they're not fast enough we've seen this
happening for years everybody knows the
problems we see the KYC sort of cancer
spreading across the entire ecosystem
where now there are no on ramps and off
ramps of any meaningful size that will
allow a normal individual a teenager
right now who doesn't even have a bank
account to go I want to buy Bitcoin
right and you guys who are working on
alternatives you can do better right
and as you do better that will pressure
the bigger actors to do better because
again it's about this incentives and
disincentives in the system if you build
a better model and no one else is
willing to reform their own model you
become the standard model and that's a
good thing for you but even if you don't
become you know the the new unicorn
whatever who cares your decisions in
designing these things create pressure
on those incumbents to reform even in
failing you can win for the world for
the community even if you don't win for
yourself personally and that's what got
me out of paradise in Hawaii in in 2013
was I thought look you know I I didn't
graduate from high school
guys I'm largely self-taught and I was
doing all right you know I'm not gonna
say I'm the world's greatest anything
but I was doing alright I was pretty
good and somehow I ended up working for
the government worked for the CIA they
put me overseas I was undercover you
know living as a diplomat in Switzerland
I went over to Japan working as a
contractor for the NSA and each time I
moved I got more and more seniority I
got more and more pay until eventually I
end up in Hawaii with the woman I love
doing a job that was like so
ridiculously undemanding in the office
of information sharing that I had time
to do anything I wanted and that meant
reading and so what I did was I read
what was going on everywhere because it
was the first position I had where I
could truly read without lines because
in the intelligence community right
there's very much this because I said
some kind of worldview where there's a
system called compartmentalization our
compartment ation where the person in
this office isn't supposed to know what
the person in this office is doing
you're not supposed to be curious you're
not supposed to even ask because you
don't have a need to know right well
when I worked in the CIA and when I
worked in the NSA previously as a tech
just as a Systems Administrator I had
broad access much broader access than
other people and I could read many
different things so I already know a lot
about what's going on relative to the
average person but when I reach the
office of information sharing of which I
was the only employee I was the office
of information sharing
now I had basically the same access to
go around and read whatever I wanted as
the director of the NSA and so what did
I do I wrote some scrapers and I started
to see everything that was out there and
everything got centralized in Hawaii and
this was so I could share it out the
treat a little system that showed people
this goes here and this goes there and
this might be useful for you in your
office in that office but I got to see
what was going on in every office and
there weren't a lot of people in NSA who
got to see this and when I did it it
started to it started to really trouble
me now you guys know what happened when
we go back to the history this is of
course the the most famous slide for you
guys because it's not about phones it's
about the Internet this was where the
largest Internet service providers in
the United States had secretly been
going far beyond what the law required
of them to cooperate with government and
hand over in many cases without warrants
the entire Google histories you know
Facebook histories whatever is in your
iCloud account and so on and so forth
over to the government under a system of
secret court orders this was
unfortunately just where it it began and
it wasn't just the internet there was a
program that the people saw that
actually wasn't related to me this was
follow up recording that came by I think
actually some years later in the United
States about the phone companies AT&T is
one of our largest of course phone
networks and what they found was that
ATT had been collecting the phone
records of everyone who crossed their
system and never getting rid of them for
ages right
if you're younger if your birth date is
after 1987 and either you're an American
or you've called the United States right
because anything across their network
went there - they have every call that
you ever made because that's how far
their records go back they were keeping
the tower data which is of course the
the ledger of your cell phones ringing
Here I am Here I am Here I am going all
the way back to July 2008 right so they
have more than a 10 year history of
everyone's movements as they cross their
the path of their cell phone towers and
this is this is the kind of thing that
was just spreading and spreading and
spreading everywhere on the internet
because we hadn't been encrypting things
by default we saw the NSA and their
partners the the the five eyes countries
as they're called that's the United
States the United Kingdom Australia New
Zealand and Canada that the Anglophone
guys had just been looking across the
backbone for anything that was even
remotely interesting and then what were
they doing they were just writing a
scraper right they were just pulling
things off the wire and then they were
filing away into their little databases
and so they we're getting pictures of
your webcams they were getting
everything that you typed into the
search box before Google finally went
and encrypted it and then they had to
ask Google for it but who would still
handle it over all because things were
not encrypted - they were in transit now
the thing I love about this chart of
course is if you look at the time line I
think this is the right one you see
there's a big spike right after June of
2013 which was the month that these
revelations of mass surveillance first
came forward and this is where I want to
talk about you guys as a cohort not just
as the people working on on web three
sort of initiatives but as technologists
you did that right that spike is you I
didn't do that you know who's on the run
from the greatest manhunt you know that
we've we've had in the United States in
in quite some time but somebody read the
news and somebody went you know what
we're gonna shift our
site to HTTPS you know we're gonna
retool our browser to prefer these kind
of things we're going to make our
applications and these things that's
just in chrome right but I can tell you
from a lot of conversations that it's
happening across the internet and so
what did these agencies do in response
they go oh no people are collecting
things in transit and of course this is
the problem they've always had
throughout history that goes you know
these people know what they're doing
they use encryption so we can't catch
them in transit well what can we do
instead and we see that you know it
doesn't matter whether you're an ally or
an enemy the British version of the NSA
put together a really complex operation
to actually hack into Belgium's national
telecommunications provider Belgic on
right now mind you they had legal means
to get all of the information they
wanted they could use what's called a
mutual legal assistance treaty to simply
go right to the Belgian law enforcement
agencies and go we need this we need
that you know please provide it to them
and take a little time because people
would have to actually check it then
they would get it instead they went well
why don't we just let ourselves in
then we don't have to deal with their
encryption because we have their keys we
can reroute their traffic we can change
the traffic flows to be more
preferential to us to route
communications of interest past our
interception points iolite oh because we
said so then as we've gone further and
further away from this 2013 moment as
encryption has become more in fact
effective as it's become more pervasive
we've seen malware and hacking attempts
really explode and go beyond the
government specifically into private
industries there's this Israeli company
called the NSO group I'm sure many of
you have heard about them one of the
things they really love to do is look
for weaknesses an iMessage iMessage of
course is enabled by default on every
iPhone in the world we just got some
CVEs about iMessage I think out of
project zero at Google
just a couple weeks ago and it's great
that these holes are finally being
closed but you need to think about how
long they were open how many others
there are
and what's next right when I message is
finally a little bit more secure and
it's just too difficult to find our
fully remote bug easily where will they
move next right encryption is not the
answer to every problem but encryption
is the standard basis for every
conversation we need to have and this is
the thing if we have companies NSO is
valued privately at 1 billion dollars or
more right now because they were just
sold for that these guys are selling
malware toolkits to governments for
millions and millions of dollars I think
the Mexican government bought it for 18
million dollars I think the Saudis
bought it for more than 50 million
dollars five zero not one five again
fact check me on these because it's all
public now these these records are out
there but who were they using it against
they were using against the head of
their opposition domestically now they
were using a journalist that we're
reporting on the corruption of the
president and so this is this is what we
start to see we start to see
corporations going well why don't
instead of making security safer why
don't we make it weaker and of course
the NSA has always been doing this
they've been discovering vulnerabilities
they've been exploiting vulnerabilities
and then they've not been reporting them
well the problem is those things leak
too they can't even keep their weapons
safe and then they hit us they shut down
the National Health Service in the UK
they shut down shipping around the world
with Maersk and all of these are derived
from NSA bugs right that should have
been reported and patched years ago
unfortunately proprietary software you
guys know how that works but even when
this doesn't happen I want you guys to
remember look you can make your software
more secure you can increase the
security of the route as you're in
transit but we see things moving
increasingly more and more to the
physical layer this is Baltimore
Maryland in the United States on the day
of a black lives matters protest this is
a minority protest movement against
police brutality and one of the
interesting things we saw was an FBI
surveillance plane during the entirety
of the protest was simply doing orbits
and again and again and again the only
reason they do that in this kind of way
is to form a census of which phones are
in the area on the basis of their radio
identifier right again those globally
unique or universally unique identifiers
that are baked into hardware and so I
want you guys to constantly be thinking
about where can we strip these
identities out because now it's not on
planes right now it's on the cell phone
tower next to you now it's in the gas
station now it's at the mall right at
the gates and every store and this is
something that's going to continue to
continue or continue to get worse and
like where is this going we see in China
where they really don't care about the
public narratives because they can use
their information control to maintain
public support despite the abuses this
is not going to be theory this is not
going to be fearful conversations from
paranoia acts like myself and hopefully
yourself this is gonna be everyone this
is gonna be your your neighbors this is
gonna be your family is gonna be people
who don't understand politics who don't
understand technology because they don't
have time right they have other
obligations they have other things
they've dedicated their lives to and
they're just trying to get through the
day and if we don't do something about
that if we simply let the world continue
on the same dynamic of an increasingly
identified world we are going to find
that we no longer have the power to
resist because we no longer have the
power to coordinate the power to
collaborate because all Authority has
become centralized centralized through
decentralization and I know everybody in
here sees decentralization is the holy
word right and it can be good
particularly when we're talking about
disrupting these established orthodoxies
but what they are doing and centralizing
authority through D D centralizing it is
they're actually just spreading what
used to be quasi or fully governmental
authorities to deputies right that
worked very closely with God
when you think about Facebook you think
you know centralized repository and
you're absolutely right when you think
about Google and Facebook now you're
talking to central authorities when you
talk about Google and Facebook and Apple
now you're talking about three
centralized authorities and I know we've
got Richard Stallman here and he's been
at this a lot longer than I have and you
know we should all be grateful for that
kind of work where they're trying to
make people understand the risks of
having unquestionable authorities that
control your operating system that
control your decisions that control your
life when we have a dynamic where you
have great power spread very unequally
along around a few deputies and these
can be deputy companies these can be
deputy governments what we ultimately
find ourselves living you know what we
ultimately find ourselves in is a world
where we're living in the midst of a net
and if we ever walk too far or we run
into that kind of grid of you can't do
that because I told you so so I know
I've rambled for a while here and I
don't want to go on too far but if I
could just summarize the points that I'm
concerned about the real value of I
think any kind of web 3 movement isn't
making decentralization work for the
public and I don't question for a minute
that that is actually the intention of
the people in this room that's why I
agreed to speak here the thing is make
sure you're doing enough right whenever
we start talking about eight identity
and we're like oh we can prove identity
and do this and that you don't want to
prove identity proving identity is a
problem recording identity is a problem
that's dangerous what you want to prove
is a right of use what you want to prove
is a token for access right we need to
make sure that everything we do happens
encrypted by default as it goes in
transit you guys are way ahead of the
game on that and that's simply just
because that's the the price for entry
to even a nominally private Internet but
then we have to disempower ourselves we
have to make sure that we are not
replacing the old central authorities
with new central authorities and I know
this gets dicey when we get into
business bottles I know everybody's you
know out there and doing different
things and I know that is very much the
purpose of what you guys are working on
is decentralization but as you get
bigger or as you get smaller and start
to become desperate I want you to
remember the danger of temptation to
succeed right because we're all human
and we all get hungry and we all make
compromises I compromised my values for
a long number of years right I was
working at the CIA I was working at the
NSA and I was happy to do so I was in
fact proud to do so I could defend
myself a little bit by saying well I
didn't know everything that was going on
and when I did I I changed but the
reality was I knew enough that I
shouldn't have been ok with it but I was
and that's because I was doing better
than I ever thought I deserved to we
need to make sure that we make a world
that is safe and we need to make sure we
do more than that we need to make sure
we have a world that is free for all
those people who were born after 1987
right for people to be able to make a
phone call again without people making a
note of it we need people to be able to
buy something you know a gift for their
mother
you know without there being a record of
it we need people to be able to go to
the gas station you know and and get a
sandwich and not have that left
somewhere we need someone to be able to
post something truly idiotic on the
internet and not have it haunt them for
the rest of their life because if we
can't make mistakes we can't learn and
if we can't learn we can't progress and
if we create this world
of just an escalator of authorities
right where we go yes the old
authorities were bad we're gonna create
new authorities and they'll do better
and then eventually we'll realize how
bad those weren't somebody else will do
that you know we might survive but I
don't think we're actually fulfilling
the promise of what we can really be
fundamentally when we think about all of
these these conversations you know
governments like say oh oh security and
privacy you know they're different
things they're actually the same
security is provided by privacy when
everything is known about you you are
vulnerable
your decisions can be anticipated and
you can be acted against if the
government wants to grant itself
security by denying all of us privacy
that should not be reassuring that
should be concerning and we need to
think about why privacy matters like why
this push for decentralization matters
you guys know and you have people who
will make the arguments better than I do
but but when I think about this I think
it's really that that question of when
somebody tells you that's the way things
are because I said so
we humanity whether we're talking
individuals whether we're talking in
families whether we're talking
communities whether we're talking
Nations whether we're talking the global
tribe we need the ability to question
them and we need the ability to change
that and the only way that can happen in
the face of extraordinary entrenched
powers is if we can collaborate and
coordinate and do this quietly if we can
talk to people that we trust if we can
sharpen our arguments if we can find our
good ideas and test and then discard our
bad ideas we can create a movement that
changes the world that that sort of
overturns this this old regime and can
hopefully in the future do away with the
need for any regime but how does that
happen that's a long way off right
come on guys we're talking we're talking
about flipping bits on the Internet but
those bits matter because it's a
foundation when we zoom out when we talk
about the concepts that everybody's
discussing here like the failure loft
the failure of governance the failure of
all these old institutions to guarantee
the rights and the freedoms that we all
expected that we all were taught in
school exist in free and open societies
what then what's our next resort what's
our last resort
you are some of the only people in the
world that can guarantee some measure of
Liberty for people in Russia for people
in China for people in Iran right and if
you can do it there you can do it
anywhere and you do it by flipping bits
let's go to questions thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
Edward Snowden the best-dressed man at
web 3 summit you're amongst a crowd of
t-shirts and hoodies but we appreciate
you showing up today so we're gonna have
some questions from the audience but
first I wanted to kick it off with with
a question that at web 3 summit we're
quite curious about is we kind of look
at this as a rallying call a statement
that you made in 2013 you said I'd
rather be without a state than without a
voice so it's six years later and how do
you feel about that
honestly this is um this is one of the
ideas and it's the most dear to me it's
one of the ones that I get a lot of
flack from actually when I speak in in
prominent settings on it because they're
like oh my goodness you know some kind
of anarchist whatever and the funny
thing is I don't think it's about
anarchism I I don't think this is a
radical statement I think it's simply
order of operations what are the things
that are most essential most vital to
human liberty what are the things that
allow us to be people right not not
simply to to exist not simply to survive
but to live if we can't think right if
we can't speak if we can't express
ourselves if we can't become the person
that we want to be
if we cannot disagree if we can't have
something of our own even if it's only
an idea uh then we don't have anything
it doesn't matter you know if we have a
state right the state comes after it's
not the state that grants all of these
things to us it is the state that is
supposed to at best protect these things
for us to act as a kind of guarantor of
them and when a state becomes contrary
to these guarantees well I think it's
time to reform it
[Applause]
so you kind of mentioned this but for
like for you to go further so it's
obvious that one of the largest problems
we face is surveillance capitalism it's
a business model and when you can't make
money advertising you're just gonna sell
personal data to the highest government
bidder and that's gonna be used for
social control the bet the fundamental
bet of blockchain technologies is that
there is the alternative based on
tokenization as you put it but do you
think that's actually gonna happen like
do you think that we could really build
a sustainable alternative so that we're
not all to be very frank starving to
death building free software I think
honestly it's inevitable look there's
gonna be a lot of failures and there's
gonna be a lot of people who don't do
this well well like think about the
internet that if you're anywhere near
the age I am I guess I'm 36 you know
it's hard to keep track the early
internet was not commercially driven
right the early internet was was goofy
it was crude it was you know BBS's and
web forms and mailing lists and then it
moved to this thing where you know it's
people are figuring out how to put up
their own web servers on the new web
right and then we get the early sort of
granted access from these guys who are
trying to become the new web Giants you
remember like geo cities you remember
like Angel Fire these were still big
silos they didn't have the kind of
sophistication and data mining that they
have quite today but the web was chaotic
it was terrible there was no like slick
design there was no great you know
formal artistic beauty in it there but
it was beauty in a different way because
it was original because everything was
driven by a purpose for a constructive
sharing purpose and look there's there's
two things that we need to look at here
there is build
community there's building a Commons
there's interacting and exchanging and
building a cultural identity and a
commercial existence where we can
survive but then there's also the take
over the world model and I think this is
where a lot of technologists are coming
in conflict with their soul if when they
realize they can design a service one
way to get by and increase you know the
value of human connection but then they
can make one little tweak and take over
the world and now they're a billionaire
and they got a private jet and whatever
it is difficult to resist that what I'm
saying is there's a medium where you can
have something between and I do think a
prerequisite for that in a way that that
protects human liberty requires a
fundamentally anonymous currency right
to be able to engage in private trade is
one of the basic human freedoms right to
be able to go look I painted this rock
do you want this rock and not to have
someone at the desk you know deciding
can you do something with this rock or
not no on the internet today you can't
do that without incredible technological
familiarity this is why you know people
have gotten on me they're like oh my god
you know he's saying all this stuff
about these other French currencies he's
not a he's an altcoin or not whatever I
I don't care about any of that guys but
when you look at what's happening with
like zero knowledge proof sand how
they're being applied and something like
Zee Cash when you see what the guys am
on there or doing even though they have
some pretty terrible community
management on that side when you look at
all of these things where they're going
can we make things where right now it's
still too hard for both of them right
the wallets are inaccessible it's the
stories the narratives are not easy to
understand for average people who don't
understand anything about technology the
on ramps and the off ramps they don't
exist but there is no reason in my mind
why you shouldn't be able to go to the
gas station and when you lay down cash
for you know a bottle of water you can
lay down cash to get a bucket of
right tokens that you can use for any
service that you can use for any product
that you can use for any anything and
then when we get beyond that we don't
even need that anymore people can
actually get paid for their labor people
can get laid paid directly into their
economy and then they're getting bucket
of internet for for everything because
why not but this is the thing where we
start running into friction with these
old institutions and you guys know that
very well you see this very well in the
KYC thing for those of you who follow
the economy today and what's going on
with the bond markets what's going on
with the currency markets
all of these government's are you know
in their inverting yields and they're
starting to ask you to pay them for the
privilege of them holding your money
right the idea of what currency is we
are at the very early moment of that
being called into question I do not
think currency as it has existed in you
know on paper issued by a central
authority is going to exist over the
long scope of history but how long it
takes to get there is very much an open
question because you guys have no idea
the kind of resistance we're going to
face when the government really feels
threatened right now the government you
know every now and then you get
officials out their legislators out
there get their hackles up they go oh my
goodness Facebook right and Facebook's
being really stupid and what they're
doing now because they're too early
right and they're going too aggressive
and they're doing it in the centralized
stupid way because of course they're
Facebook but the main thing is right now
everything what every person in this
room is doing is a novelty the state
does not care because you are not a
threat but you will be and when you will
be you need to very quickly move from
being a threat to being an just
completely irresistible wave right that
cannot be undone it what your work
becomes a fait accompli and that is the
only way that this really works but I
think that actually is going to happen
because there's simply too many people
working on
in too many jurisdictions in too many
languages and ultimately when we're
talking about the network so long as we
can establish those essential
foundations that I talked about before
you know you connect from one state to
server in a completely different state
and nobody knows because it's encrypted
and more importantly the metadata is
munge right you've got tor like mix nets
that are preserving privacy where new
technologies that I don't know about
right we've got I think we've got David
Shum at this conference who's done
amazing work in the past as well we need
to solve these metadata problems and we
need to do this not just for money we
need to do this not just for wonky
protocols on the edge we need to do this
everywhere for everything and we need it
to be invisible because the user is not
going to become an expert the user
doesn't care the user just wants to
exist they just want to live they just
want to do they just want to be but if
you give them a voice they will feel the
value of that and they will love that
and they will be willing to defend that
when it comes under attack but only if
they're able to know that it is possible
that it exists and they're not going to
know that without you
I like that z cash your bucket of
Internet they should really run with
that I was Canales it I was in the my
background is a investigative journalist
for The Guardian before I work for now
streamer and I was in the newsroom when
the what we call the NSA revelations but
are now generally known as the Snowden
revelations were revealed as I sat next
to you and McCaskill and Luke Harding
and and there was this discussion after
discussion in the days that followed
about where was the public reaction
right where were these riots on the
streets I was kind of the expectation
did you so the question is this did you
expect the public outcry on the streets
but then did you also expect this which
is this room of people who are pretty
well-funded
fairly well-funded coming together and
technologists fighting technology yes I
mean it's a great question it's hard to
answer because so much happened in so
many places in the United States
actually we did get the Marches right we
got protest movements eventually we even
got our laws changed not far enough
right but we got the first substantive
reforms to intelligence collection
authorities in the United States since
the 1970s sitting in the UK you know in
London with the Guardian it was a very
different reaction and it's interesting
because you know the British media
system you know better than I do is
unique and in unfortunately in many ways
uniquely terrible I mean that the
government puts out D notices and you
know the BBC and whatnot all these
competitors of the Guardian didn't do
follow-up reporting right they they
didn't want to share the story they
didn't want to be a part of the story
instead they tried to just ignore it and
so only the Guardian was actually out
there running with this so readers the
Guardian were well informed but
everybody else broadly socially they
didn't even realize it was happening in
a meaningful way and where they did know
something was happening they didn't know
the significance of it and that was
actually an intentional strategy now
this is one of the challenges with the
media environment around the
because we see this sort of news
distortion happening on topic after
topic in country after country it's not
unique right but I did know and I did
believe from the beginning that this was
not likely to be you know the kind of
thing that they gets people burning down
buildings I didn't want to burn down
buildings in that very first interview
with you and McCaskill actually I said
you know I'm not trying to burn down the
NSA if I wanted to do that I could do
that in that afternoon right I had
access to everything what I was trying
to do was give people the information
that had been withheld from them that
belonged to them that they needed to
know
in order to actually exercise their role
as citizens in a democracy and that
means a lot of things and it's not just
voting right
in a democracy the pageantry of voting
is absolutely meaningless if the
citizenry is not informed right consent
is not meaningful if it's not informed
and unfortunately that's the way our
governments have been operating in the
long war period since since 9/11 and
there are arguments that that's the way
it's actually always been I'm a good
friend of Daniel Ellsberg and he told me
in the 1970s
you know during presidential elections
one of the Opposition folks who was
trying to win the presidency were
secretly telling the Vietnamese not to
end the war until after the election and
all of these these kind of things
politics are a dirty dirty thing but
when we move beyond the politics we have
the individual action all right and we
have the collective action that happens
at a sub-national scale and the
unfortunate reality of a lot of
surveillance right 2013 was as much
about democracy as it was about
surveillance but surveillance and
technology was a significant portion of
this discussion and when we look at what
happens with that whole surveillance
segment it is an expert conversation
that's an unfortunate reality right when
you start talking to my average person
about metadata they can understand it
absolutely when you start talking to
them about you know even an exploit
chain and how it works something that's
very much arcane and seeing you know
beyond the can of the average person
you're wrong they can understand it but
it takes a lot of time it takes a lot of
explanation right and a lot of people
one of the things they don't have today
is a lot of free time to engage in a lot
of obscure conversations legislators
today have no idea what the actual
meaningful outcomes of these
surveillance economies these global mass
surveillance systems really mean and
they don't care because the systemic
incentives are such that they are
rewarded for turning a blind eye and
they're punished for acting against it
because there's a giant corporate
machine behind this and these are the
guys who ultimately in the United States
will pay you directly if you don't pay
pass a law or in other countries will
work very hard to make sure you get
positive coverage and opportunities to
establish your continue to Kumbha see if
you do what they like that doesn't work
the same with individual technologists
that doesn't work the same with the
people in this room that doesn't work
with Richard Stallman right who could be
a very very rich man but is instead
sitting in this room with you over over
this this week and I think that is one
of the things that we have to remember
when you talk about problems and
conflicts that are happening on a social
scale on a human scale elections are not
your only recourse right an election is
not going to be changed by a
peer-reviewed paper an election is not
going to be changed by the academic
consensus unfortunately we see this kind
of thing within discussions about
climate change right science is settled
but political opinion is still for its
own self-interest pretending that it's
not what technology is different because
when you talk about how
science when you talk about hard math
when you talk about Coda's law you can
export values digitally to every
jurisdiction in the world so long as
your protocol can't be identified and
excluded right if you make your protocol
look like every other protocol if your
protocol looks like HTTP 443 right you
can change the status quo not in your
country you can change the status quo in
the worst of countries and that is a
fundamentally powerful thing that has
always given me out the optimism since
the beginning the one thing I will tell
you about 2013 that I did not expect is
I didn't think we'd still be talking
about this in 2019 I thought this was
very much gonna be a two-week story
because it was so specialist I thought
things would be very different than they
are today but rather far more to the
negative than the positive I have been
surprised and gladdened to see the
contrary to what the conventional wisdom
is which is that nobody cares that
nothing's changed
privacy is a front page story every week
all around the world today right it not
a month goes by when you don't see some
kind of legal hearing when you don't see
people talking about changing laws it
could be the GD P R and EU it could be
all of these lawsuits against Facebook's
and Google's the world is changing and
public opinion is changing and it's very
much going in the favor of people who do
not like what these companies are doing
rather than a company's favors the
difference is the companies control the
system today the companies control the
incentive today the question is can they
maintain that control and in all honesty
I think over the span of time the answer
is No
hi Edward thanks for the insights
there's one sort of question that's on
the back of my mind I think as we
develop the software and these
technologies were doing so I think I
think you sort of mentioned earlier that
broadly in in reaction to the way that
the world seems to be going the way that
the social structures that we have the
way that the establishment seems to be
behaving the software is increasingly
allowing distributed anonymous or very
you know very very pseudonymous
individuals to come together and perform
the services that would otherwise have
been very focused very targeted by the
powers that be so you can see this with
you know BitTorrent allowing the hosting
of information that would otherwise have
to have been placed on a server run by a
particular operating company that could
have been taken now so increasingly
software is moving its latest you know
it's technology
it's the unstoppable force and it's it's
gonna eventually but it's head against
the immovable object which is national
governments national laws and the
establishment something's going to have
to give either either the laws are going
to change in the same way that copyright
law kind of changed a bit with the
advent of VCRs or things that we take
for granted today and by that I
basically mean writing software will
become controlled and illegal in parts
and we already got a taste of this right
with with crypto in the 90s and early
noughties there was this notion of you
know crypto being weaponized software
the u.s. made it illegal to to allow
other countries to downloads that which
way do you think it's gonna go well just
a couple comments first was about like
you know the Bitcoin protocol or Bitcoin
sorry BitTorrent protocol and the idea
that you know previously these files
would be stored
you know on servers on
particular hosts and that could be taken
down really that's all the BitTorrent
protocol is doing is making everyone a
server and that's the reality everything
is a server if you're brave enough right
when you look at this kind of dynamic I
think that's what the promise of
decentralization is all about it is
erasing the old paradigms of how we
think about connection the idea that
there was one big server and many
clients when it said it could be many
clients who are also many servers and
when the client finishes they become a
server right and then then then serve
others these these dynamics are
transformative and when the law takes a
particular paradigm into consideration
at the time it's written and then that
paradigm no longer exists the law
necessarily has to change or it is no
longer respected it's no longer sort of
man excuse me there's some construction
noise here when we look at that future
we can't say which direction it's gonna
go I can't say one way or the other
with certainty but my suspicion is that
it's gonna be both the laws will change
the technologies will change but the
trend of progress over time
will be in favor of Liberty right it's
very easy to look at the problems we
have today and give up go the world
sucks life sucks things are Donald Trump
is president right when you look over 50
years when you look over a hundred years
when you look over five hundred years
we're doing very well and I think that
will continue thank you
[Applause]
[Music]
do you still have time for one more
question
I'd like to take one but with the
construction noise I think it's not
gonna work okay got it I saw a different
time clock but ladies and gentlemen
Edward Snowden
[Music]
[Applause]
thank you for your service and for your
sacrifice and for everything you do for
this community thank you and the
dramatic construction music
[Applause]